chore: add prebuild docs (#17580)
coder/coder: docs/admin/templates/extending-templates/prebuilt-workspaces.md

# Prebuilt workspaces

## Overview

Prebuilt workspaces let you pre-provision and maintain a pool of ready-to-deploy workspaces.
Instead of creating a new workspace when a developer requests one, if a workspace matches a preset defined in the
template parameters, Coder assigns an existing instance, reducing setup time significantly.

## Prerequisites

- Premium license
- Use `coder/coder` Terraform provider `>= 2.3.0-pre2` in your template (**TODO: update with latest version**)
- Enable the `workspace-prebuilds` [experiment](../../../reference/cli/server.md#--experiments)

## Configuration

1. In your Terraform template, add a `prebuilds` block within a `coder_workspace_preset` block:

   ```hcl
   data "coder_workspace_preset" "goland" {
     name = "GoLand: Large"
     parameters = {
       jetbrains_ide = "GO"
       cpus          = 8
       memory        = 16
     }
     prebuilds {
       instances = 3
     }
   }
   ```

>    Do not define values for `coder_workspace` or `coder_workspace_owner`.
>    These values are [replaced](#resource-replacement) when the workspace is deployed, and if Coder detects an existing
>    value, it will destroy the prebuilt workspace and create a new one.

Reviewer: @dannykopping flagging this for review - I want to bring a notice about it closer to where it might happen, but I'm not sure if I captured the quick version correctly.

I
```suggestion
   Do not define values for `coder_workspace` or `coder_workspace_owner`.
   These values are [replaced](#resource-replacement) when the workspace is deployed, and if Coder detects an existing
   value, it will destroy the prebuilt workspace and create a new one for the user.
```

Author: These values cannot be set, they're derived.
I'll revert this.

- **Feature flag**: Enable the `workspace-prebuilds` [experiment](../../../reference/cli/server.md#--experiments).

## Enable prebuilt workspaces for template presets

In your template, add a `prebuilds` block within a `coder_workspace_preset` block to identify how many prebuilt
instances your Coder deployment should maintain:

   ```hcl
   data "coder_workspace_preset" "goland" {
     name = "GoLand: Large"
     parameters = {
       jetbrains_ide = "GO"
       cpus          = 8
       memory        = 16
     }
     prebuilds {
       instances = 3  # Number of prebuilt workspaces to maintain
     }
   }
   ```

After you create or update the template, Coder automatically provisions and maintains prebuilt workspaces through an
internal reconciliation loop (similar to Kubernetes) to maintain the number of specified `instances`.

Prebuilt workspaces are displayed in the list of workspaces on the Coder dashboard with the owner set to `prebuilds`.

## Prebuilt workspace lifecycle

Prebuilt workspaces follow a specific lifecycle from creation through eligibility to claiming.

Expand each item in this list for more information about the stage:

> 1. <details><summary>The prebuilt workspace is provisioned.</summary>

Reviewer: I don't know how keen I am on this yet.

The goal was to summarize the lifecycle in a way that people can see easily and drill down into for more details if they want. I'm going to try another edit of the summaries to see if I can get it to work, and if it doesn't, I'll revert to separate headings

1. When a template version changes, Prebuilds for old versions are automatically deleted.
1. New Prebuilds are created for the active template version.
1. Prebuilds aren't automatically updated after creation.
1. If dependencies change (e.g., an [AMI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AMIs.html) update) without a template version change, you can:
   - Delete the existing Prebuilds manually.
   - Coder will automatically create new prebuilt workspaces with the updated dependencies.

The system always maintains the desired number of prebuilt workspaces for the active template version.

### Relationship to workspace presets

Prebuilt workspaces are tightly integrated with [workspace presets](./parameters.md#workspace-presets-beta):

1. Each Prebuild is associated with a specific template preset.
1. The preset must define all required parameters needed to build the workspace.
1. Parameters that are not defined in the preset can still be customized by users when they claim a workspace.
1. The preset parameters define the base configuration and are immutable after they're claimed.
1. Prebuilds help presets deliver even faster workspace creation.

> _Note: In future releases, we will allow operators to invalidate their prebuilt workspaces programmatically._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> # Prebuilt workspaces (beta)

Author: Maybe not... see my changes in `manifest.json`

> # Prebuilt workspaces (beta)

Reviewer: thanks for fixing it in `manifest` - I copy/pasted and forgot to edit it to `beta`

## Overview

> Prebuilt workspaces let you pre-provision and maintain a pool of ready-to-deploy workspaces.

Author: `deploy` is an overloaded term, let's use `ready-to-use`.
```suggestion
Prebuilt workspaces let you pre-provision and maintain a pool of ready-to-use workspaces.
```

# Prebuilt workspaces

> Prebuilt workspaces (Prebuilds) allow template administrators to improve the developer experience by reducing workspace

Author: I'm trying to stay away from the term `prebuilds` because it has confusing connotations (i.e. it's not a _build_, it's a _workspace_)
```suggestion
Prebuilt workspaces allow template administrators to improve the developer experience by reducing workspace
```

Author: TBH this is much wordier and less clear than "Prebuilt workspaces let you pre-provision and maintain a pool of ready-to-use workspaces." although I like the developer experience bit.

Reviewer: yeah, I'm not super sold on `Prebuilds` either, I thought we were using it as a feature name, but I'm happy to just keep `prebuilt workspaces` throughout

creation time with an automatically maintained pool of ready-to-use workspaces for specific parameter presets.

> The template administrator configures a template to be available with prebuilt workspaces, and then when a developer creates

Author: ```suggestion
The template administrator configures a template to provision prebuilt workspaces in the background, and then when a developer creates
```

> a new workspace with matching parameters, Coder assigns them an existing prebuilt instance.

Author: ```suggestion
a new workspace with matching a preset, Coder assigns them an existing prebuilt instance.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a new workspace that matches the preset, Coder assigns them an existing prebuilt instance.
```

Prebuilt workspaces significantly reduce wait times, especially for templates with complex provisioning or lengthy startup procedures.

Prebuilt workspaces are:

- Created and maintained automatically by Coder to match your specified preset configurations.

> - Claimed transparently when developers request matching workspaces.

Author: ```suggestion
- Claimed transparently when developers create workspaces.
```

- Monitored and replaced automatically to maintain your desired pool size.

## Prerequisites

- [**Premium license**](../../licensing/index.md)

> - [**Template administrator privileges**](../../users/groups-roles.md)

Author: ```suggestion
```

I think it's redundant to mention this since all template changes require this role, and it muddies the waters since it's listed alongside licenses and feature flags which are out of the scope of this role.

> - **Compatible Terraform provider**: Use `coder/coder` Terraform provider `>= 2.3.0-pre2`. (**TODO: update with latest version**)

Author: NOTE: we must not merge until this is updated.

   These values are [replaced](#resource-replacement) when the workspace is deployed, and if Coder detects an existing
   value, it will destroy the prebuilt workspace and create a new one.

1. Publish and import the template.
1. Coder automatically provisions another prebuilt workspace through an internal reconciliation loop
   (similar to Kubernetes) to maintain the number of specified `instances`.

## Workspace ownership

After a prebuilt workspace is created, it is owned by the unprivileged pseudo-user `prebuilds`, which belongs to the
`Everyone` group.
Coder uses the `prebuilds` user to identify unclaimed prebuilt workspaces.
You can add the `prebuilds` user to additional groups if you need to.

## View prebuilt workspaces

You can view prebuilt workspaces in the **Workspaces** view in the Coder dashboard:

![A prebuilt workspace on the dashboard](../../../images/admin/templates/extend-templates/prebuilt/prebuilt-workspaces.png)

## Claiming

A prebuilt workspace is automatically and transparently assigned to a user when a:

- User creates a new workspace via the API or the Coder web UI.
- User selected a preset which has been configured for prebuilds.

> - Prebuilt workspace is in eligible state.

Author: ```suggestion
- Prebuilt workspace is in an eligible state.
```

       memory        = 16
     }
     prebuilds {

>        instances = 3  // Number of prebuilt workspaces to maintain

Author: Nit

```suggestion
       instances = 3  # Number of prebuilt workspaces to maintain
```

     }
   }
   ```

After you create or update the template, Coder automatically provisions and maintains prebuilt workspaces through an
internal reconciliation loop (similar to Kubernetes) to maintain the number of specified `instances`.

> Prebuilt workspaces are displayed in the list of workspaces on the Coder dashboard with the owner set to `prebuilds`.

Author: This should link to the ownership section.

Author: Should be OK 👍

## Prebuild lifecycle

Prebuilt workspaces follow a specific lifecycle from creation through eligibility to claiming.

Expand each item in this list for more information about the stage:

1. <details><summary>Prebuilds provisioning and initial state</summary>

   After you configure a preset with Prebuilds and publish the template:

   1. Coder automatically creates prebuilt workspaces up to the specified `instances` count.
   1. Each new prebuild is initially owned by an unprivileged system pseudo-user named `prebuilds`.
      - The `prebuilds` user belongs to the `Everyone` group (you can add it to additional groups if needed).
   1. Each Prebuild receives a randomly generated name for identification.

   </details>

1. <details><summary>Eligibility process</summary>

   Before a prebuilt workspace is available to users:

>    1. The workspace is provisioned like a regular workspace.

Author: This should probably move to the section above.

   1. The workspace reaches `running` state.

>    1. The agent connects and reports `ready` status.
>    1. All bootstrap procedures and startup scripts complete successfully.

Author: The order of these two is flipped.

```suggestion
   1. The agent connects to coderd.
   1. The agent starts its bootstrap procedures and startup scripts complete successfully.
   1. The agent reports `ready` status.
```

>    1. The workspace is marked as `eligible` to be claimed.

Author: ```suggestion
```

There is no such marking.

Reviewer: I guessed this from the [available metrics](https://github.com/coder/coder/pull/17580/files#diff-c18bc8ccd336eb66c2307125b15bd13b19df2d190cae3939075ac741ab5cc19cR207)

>    Prebuilds that fail during provisioning are retried with an exponential backoff to prevent resource waste.

Author: ```suggestion
   Prebuilds that fail during provisioning are retried with an exponential backoff to prevent transient failures.
```

   </details>

1. <details><summary>Claiming process</summary>

   When a developer requests a new workspace, the claiming process occurs:

   1. Developer selects a template and preset that has Prebuilds configured.
   1. If an eligible prebuilt workspace exists, it's automatically assigned to the user.
   1. Ownership transfers from the `prebuilds` user to the requesting user.
   1. The workspace name changes to the user's requested name.
   1. The process is transparent to the developer - they simply see a workspace ready faster than normal.

   This ownership transfer happens automatically without any special action required by the user.

   </details>

You can view available prebuilt workspaces in the **Workspaces** view in the Coder dashboard:

![A prebuilt workspace in the dashboard](../../../images/admin/templates/extend-templates/prebuilt/prebuilt-workspaces.png)

> ### Template updates and prebuilt lifecycle

Author: Nit: consistency

```suggestion
### Template updates and prebuild lifecycle
```

Prebuilt workspaces have specific behavior when templates are updated:

1. When a template version changes, Prebuilds for old versions are automatically deleted.
1. New Prebuilds are created for the active template version.
1. Prebuilds aren't automatically updated after creation.
1. If dependencies change (e.g., an [AMI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AMIs.html) update) without a template version change, you can:
   - Delete the existing Prebuilds manually.
   - Coder will automatically create new prebuilt workspaces with the updated dependencies.

The system always maintains the desired number of prebuilt workspaces for the active template version.

### Relationship to workspace presets

Prebuilt workspaces are tightly integrated with [workspace presets](./parameters.md#workspace-presets-beta):

1. Each Prebuild is associated with a specific template preset.
1. The preset must define all required parameters needed to build the workspace.

> 1. Parameters that are not defined in the preset can still be customized by users when they claim a workspace.
> 1. The preset parameters define the base configuration and are immutable after they're claimed.

Author: Nit: flows better this way IMHO.

```suggestion
1. The preset parameters define the base configuration and are immutable after they're claimed.
1. Parameters that are not defined in the preset can still be customized by users when they claim a workspace.
```

> 1. Prebuilds help presets deliver even faster workspace creation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> _Note: In future releases, we will allow operators to invalidate their prebuilt workspaces programmatically._

Author: This is oddly out of place now.

## Administration and troubleshooting

### Managing resource quotas

Prebuilt workspaces can be used in conjunction with [resource quotas](../../users/quotas.md).
Because unclaimed prebuilt workspaces are owned by the `prebuilds` user, you can:

1. Configure quotas for any group that includes this user.
1. Set appropriate limits to balance Prebuild availability with resource constraints.

> 1. Monitor quota utilization through Coder's dashboard.

Author: Is this possible? If so I'm not familiar with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

ooh - I hope this wasn't part of something I missed in my "hey claude, check my work" edit.

If a quota is exceeded, the prebuilt workspace will fail provisioning the same way other workspaces do.

### Template configuration best practices

#### Preventing resource replacement

> When a prebuilt workspace is claimed, Terraform runs again with new values for the workspace owner and name.

Author: ```suggestion
When a prebuilt workspace is claimed, another `terraform apply` run occurs with new values for the workspace owner and name.
```

Author: I feel this has gotten a lot less clear. How the new values for workspace owner and name are materially important here, and mentioning the `coder_` datasources is paramount.

Reviewer: I'm trying to find a way to make this more active - does it make sense to say ?

```md
Coder runs `terraform apply` with new values...
```

This can cause issues:

1. The workspace is initially created with values from the `prebuilds` user and a random name.

> 1. After claiming, the workspace owner and name change, which Terraform sees as configuration drift.

Author: This is too specific. The owner & name change are two of a very large set of possible changes.

## Relationship to workspace presets

[Workspace presets](./parameters.md#workspace-presets-beta) allow you to configure commonly used combinations of
parameters into a single option, which makes it easier for developers to pick one that fits their needs.

Prebuilt workspaces need to have a preset defined to match the base configuration of a workspace, i.e. the preset
needs to define all the required parameters needed to build a workspace. These parameters are necessary in order to
build workspaces in the background.

Parameters which are not required or not part of a preset can still be used with prebuilt workspaces.
The preset defines the minimum required set of parameters, and these are immutable.

## Update a prebuilt workspace

Prebuilt workspaces are not automatically updated after they are created.

When a template version changes, all prebuilt workspaces relating to an inactive template version are destroyed.
New prebuilt workspaces will be provisioned for the active template version.

> You can invalidate a prebuilt workspace your template version does not change but a referenced dependency does,

Author: ```suggestion
You may want to invalidate a prebuilt workspace when your template version does not change but a referenced dependency does,
```

Should this occur when a prebuilt workspace is claimed, all Template Admins will receive a notification which will
link them to the build logs to investigate which resource was being replaced.

> ![Workspace replaced notification.png](../../../images/admin/templates/extend-templates/prebuilt/replacement-notification.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![resource replaced notification](../../../images/admin/templates/extend-templates/prebuilt/replacement-notification.png)
```

  [coder/internal#312](https://github.com/coder/internal/issues/312)

### Monitoring and observability

#### Available metrics

Coder provides several metrics to monitor your prebuilt workspaces:

- `coderd_prebuilt_workspaces_created_total` (counter): Total number of prebuilt workspaces created to meet the desired instance count.
- `coderd_prebuilt_workspaces_failed_total` (counter): Total number of prebuilt workspaces that failed to build.
- `coderd_prebuilt_workspaces_claimed_total` (counter): Total number of prebuilt workspaces claimed by users.
- `coderd_prebuilt_workspaces_desired` (gauge): Target number of prebuilt workspaces that should be available.
- `coderd_prebuilt_workspaces_running` (gauge): Current number of prebuilt workspaces in a `running` state.
- `coderd_prebuilt_workspaces_eligible` (gauge): Current number of prebuilt workspaces eligible to be claimed.

#### Logs

Search for `coderd.prebuilds:` in your logs to track the reconciliation loop's behavior.

These logs provide information about:

1. Creation and deletion attempts for prebuilds.
1. Backoff events after failed builds.

> 1. Eligibility state changes.

Author: I don't think this is true anymore; where did you derive this from?

Reviewer: this was part of the guess from [available metrics](https://github.com/coder/coder/pull/17580/files#r2067399290)

the metrics are available but don't show in the logs?
```suggestion
```
